You know this old man, don’t you?
The “Oracle of Omaha”, they called him.
Warren Buffett.
He once said.., (well, I am not sure if he
was the original person who came up with the
quote, or if he was quoting somebody in his
Tweet.. he is so knowledgeable, it could have
well been him!, but I remember seeing this
quote as from somebody else too))..
It seems he said, “Money is not everything”..
he didn’t stop there.. he said, “Money
is not everything, but make enough of it before
you mouth such bullshit!”
Namaste!
Four Sixty Five is about the Signs of Happiness.
Signs.
Science..
At Zoho Schools, just a couple of weeks ago,
we finished one more year.
One more successful year, of training students.
And, for the Tech community, we used this
book as a very important reference to the
world of software engineering.
This is Jeff Atwood, and he has been maintaining
a blog for a very long time.
And, he had picked some of the best articles
from his blog and made it into a book.
Effective Programming — More than just writing
code!
You must remember StackOverflow, of course.
He is the cofounder of StackOverflow!
If he speaks, there is great benefit in listening!
What I liked best about this book though was
the last chapter of the book that we reviewed
on the last day of the course.
Very interestingly, that last chapter talked
about Happiness..
“Hey, do you want to be happy?
Really, truly, happy?
Remember these eight points”.
They start by first saying that it is not
about money.
We have encountered this theme in earlier
Quotidians too.
Beyond a particular threshold, just adding
more money to your takehome salary will not
add to your Happiness Bucket.
They call that the Fulfilment Curve.
There is Money Spent on the X-Axis.
And, there is Fulfilment on the Y-Axis.
For a while, things look good and rosy.
During the Survival Phase, you get more fulfilment
as you get more money.
Then comes the Comfort Phase, where, even
though the curve has started to plateau slowly,
you still have the same trusted formula — More
Money, More Happiness.
Then you get to the Luxury Phase..
Something that is available perhaps just to
one in a million.
Those rare pleasures.
An amazing car perhaps.
A large bungalow perhaps.
A world tour perhaps.
I don’t know what your definition of luxury
is, but, until that point is reached, the
curve continues.
But after that, you reach a point where you
have to say Enough.
For, beyond that, it is Decadence and Extravagance.
You will actually feel LESS FULFILLED when
you spend more.
In many countries, across many decades, and
multiple times, they have conducted this research.
And, they have arrived at a simple thumbrule:
If you want to be optimally happy, you should
ensure that you don’t earn LESS than three
times the povery-line amount in your country.
I gave you the bit about “Should not earn
LESS than”.
But, there is another bit too!
“Shouldn’t earn MUCH MORE than” too,
the authors add!
Whatever the poverty scale is in your country,
you should aim to stabilise at around thrice
that amount, not less, not more!
Let us now jump into those eight interesting
lessons that the article gives us.
All of those are based on the Maslow’s Hierarchy
— we have encountered this before too.
Lower levels being more important and fundamental,
but eventually, you start realising that the
higher ones are those that give you true,
lasting, happiness.
All of those eight beautiful lessons take
us on a journey aimed towards the higher echelons
of the pyramid.
The first lesson is about “What do you collect”..
Do you collect objects?
Do you collect things?
Do you collect material possessions?
Or, do you collect experiences?
For, when you collect things, they get old,
they will break..
They will become ordinary..
they will laugh at me if I flaunt my iPhone
7 around!
They will become ordinary.
They will wear out.
And, you can’t really share them!
Compare this with experiences?
They never get old.
In fact, an experience GROWS in grandeur and
magnitude after every retelling!
The story gets better and better!
When you start your “That thundering slide
down the slope on my skis in the Swiss Alps…”,
you are reliving that experience.
It never gets old.
No wear and tear.
Nor does it become costlier, like it does
with things, when the price of goods goes
up due to inflation and other reasons.
Experiences stick with you, and not only are
they easy to share..
Sharing IS THE THING about the experience.
Sharing when it is happening, sharing when
it is going to happen, sharing after it has
happened.
So, if you are going to spend, spend them
on collecting experiences, not on collecting
things.
The second advice the book gives us is, “Focus
on the progress of others, not just on yours
own”.
Only in helping them reach higher, do you
actually rise.
When you do a Google search, the most frequently
seen image would be this.
A guy, having climbed, turns back, to help
the other person behind them.
But, I would actually want to take it a little
further, I will stretch it and say, why not
think about situations like these, where,
you don’t actually go up.
You help the others go.. sometimes higher
than you.
That pleasure you derive from that?
A teacher, a guru, that pleasure they get
when they see their students climb great heights..
higher than they ever reached.
Man is a social animal.
What can I do to the others around me, so
I can see happiness in their faces, and from
that, derive my own reflected joy..?
That is one of the key principles of longterm
joy.
So, these authors say, try and integrate into
your daily life, your day-to-day-routine,
some kind of spending (could be time, could
be money) for the sake of others.
Some amount of time, some amount of money,
for the sake of others.
Do that, and you will know true joy!
Number Three is to focus on the small, not
as much on the big.
Do you remember this song?
From “The Sound of Music” — a song that
goes “These are a few of my favourite things”.
Simple, plain, raindrops on roses, whiskers
on kitten, copper tea kettle..
If you can find joy in those simple things,
if you can split your joy into a multitude..
many.. rather than focus on one big bang,
you are probably likelier to be happier.
Why so?
Well, when you focus all your happiness on
the achievement of one thing, the heart has
a strange way of handling stress.
It has a safety valve.
Too much pain, too much pleasure, the safety
valve takes over.
Remember the “cloying of pleasure” and
the “inuring to pain”?
Activated!
And so, when you are looking forward to something
too much, you don’t really enjoy it as much
as you could have if you had broken it up
into many parts..
Split it up, they say!
The key takeaway there is, when it comes to
happiness, don’t focus on the intensity,
focus instead on the frequency.
Not how large a spike, but how many spikes
in your emotional equilibrium!
Nice idea!
Number Four is about insurance.
This is no big deal, not something we don’t
know, anyway.
Beware of all these insurance scams…
Why?
Most of the time we are sold stuff because
we are afraid of loss.
Life loss, loss due to fire, loss due to earthquake,
.. yes, if they happen, it is going to be
really painful.
But, the amount of money you spend trying
to protect yourself, is imbalanced, say the
authors.
They also point at another paradox here.
It so happens that those who are insured go
around “courting disaster” because “they
have insurance after all”!
Worse, because your inner mind is constantly
telling you that you have insurance against
risk, the true joy of taking that leap of
faith, leaping into that risky adventure,
is diluted a bit because, “you have insurance
after all”!
So, beware of taking on too much insurance..
Beware of return clauses..
Don’t buy stuff just because they have a
no-questions-asked return policy!
It takes away the joy of experiencing something
new!
Number Five is about Pay Now Consume Later.
These days, the trend seems to be “Buy Now
Pay Later”..
Turn that around.
Do you really need it?
Do you need this specific brand and model?
Do you need it right now?
Keep asking..
Remember the marshmallow test?
Little children offered a sweet now, versus
two sweets if only they could wait half an
hour.. delaying gratification has a direct
correlation to success in their career.
So, learn to delay, learn to consume later.
Number Six is the act of reflection.
We think..
But, do we think about the fact that we are
thinking?
The act of thinking about thinking.
We all know what we think about.
Do we know the process of our thinking?
The How?
Do we spend time analysing WHY we think the
way we think?
(Start with WHY).
Why is this important?
Very often, we do System 1 thinking.
That fast, rash, instantaneous thoughtless
thinking.
And we fall into decisions.
Give it time.
Let the sleepy, lethargic, smart and wise
System 2 wake up!
You are going to buy a thing.
Don’t just dwell idly on the pleasures that
you are going to receive when you are with
it, the joys you will get when you use it.
Here is something else you might want to think
about.
When you are going to take it home, where
are you going to place it??
And what was there till then?
When you are going to take it home, when are
you going to use it??
And what were you doing at that time, till
then?
You are going to have to do “replacement”.
The area available in your house?
Finite.
The time you have at your disposal?
24 hours.
Limited.
If a new thing comes along, what are you going
to have to throw away?
Think about that too.
Number Seven is about comparison.
We have already seen the Apple-Orange comparison.
We have learned that such comparisons are
flawed.
But, the authors?
They say, most comparisons are arbitrary and
misleading, and so, don’t lower yourself
into that just because it is available!
Comparisons are unnecessary and sometimes
they are dangerous for you.
Look at this chart, from a product company
called Mailchimp.
Talking about three types of service offerings.
Different pricing schemes.
Nearly nobody is going to opt for that costliest
pricing scheme, far left.
Nobody.
But, it is there for a very important reason.
It is there to show that the other pricing
schemes are.. quite friendly on the pocket.
“Hey, sounds great value for money, if you
compare it with that..”
But, wait, why are you even comparing?!
That is the point.
Look for what you are going to need.
Think about that.
Don’t compare for the sake of comparison.
And finally, the eighth advice they give us…
This one kinda rubbed me the wrong way.
I am not fully convinced..
The authors say, “Follow the herd, not the
head”..
The world is beating a particular path, like
a herd of mindless sheep.. but, don’t jump
to a derogatory verdict too soon..
Over time, over many generations, they have
each learned what is happening..
A million people can’t be wrong.
Understand what the world says about something..
Too often, we overestimate our uniqueness,
the authors say.
That we are one in a million, that our way
of thinking is unique, that our desires and
motives are different from everybody else,
.. etc.
Probably, we are overdoing it.
We are more like everybody else than we want
to agree..
And so, understand what the users say, watch
what their opinion is, and then take your
decisions.
So, eight beautiful lessons, from three authors,
in a book about software engineering.
I felt these were good lessons for life, applicable
to anybody, not just software engineers, and
that is why I decided to share these with
you.
That brings us to the Closing Thought.
And, who are those three people?
Daniel Gilbert, Elizabeth Dunn, Timothy Wilson.
Authors of topnotch best-sellers, each.
They published a paper, and in that paper,
I found these eight lessons.
Want to know the title of the paper?
Here goes!
The title says, “If money doesn’t make
you happy, you probably aren’t spending
it right!”
How paradoxical!
We have heard of “Money doesn’t buy happiness”.
We started with Buffett’s “Money isn’t
everything”.
And, these authors say, “You can make it
buy you happiness, but you need to follow
these eight scientific lessons!”
Alright, go shopping!
We will meet again soon, thank you!